RFC 44: Make "Custom models" the default (#44)
torchbox/weps: text/044-image-models.md

# RFC 44: Make "custom image model" the default

* Authors: Karl Hobley
* Created: 2019-10-23
* Last Modified: 2018-10-23

## Abstract

Custom image models is a feature that Wagtail has had since the very beginning. It allows developers to replace Wagtail's built-in image model with their own one and customise it by adding new fields or overriding methods to change behaviour.

The problem is it’s very hard to migrate to them once you already have built a website that uses Wagtail’s built-in image model. This also makes it difficult for us to build optional add-on features for images that require a custom image model (such as AMP support or translation).

> This RFC proposes that we start recommending that all new Wagtail projects uses custom image model from the start. This will add a small amount of extra code to the project template, which I know we would want to avoid. But I think avoiding a potentially very difficult migration later outweighs the overhead of having on extra app in the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes that we start creating all new Wagtail projects with a custom image model from the start. This will add a small amount of extra code to the project template, which I know we would want to avoid. But I think avoiding a potentially very difficult migration later outweighs the overhead of having one extra app in the project.
```

> This also applies to document models as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also applies to image rendition and document models as well.
```

## Specification

> To implement this RFC, we will make the following changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement this RFC, we will make the following changes:
```

> ### Update the project template to use a custom image model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Update the project template to use custom image, rendition, and document models
```

We will add a new app called `assets` into the base project template. This will contain three models: `Image`, `Rendition` and `Document`.

All three of these models will exactly match their built-in counterparts (we will not add an `alt` field to the image model out of the box).

### Add a custom image model to bakerydemo

We will add the `assets` app as described in the previous section and update the fixtures and foreign keys to use this new app.

### Rename the built-in models to fix naming conflict and discourage their use

Currently, custom image models are often called `CustomImage` or `WebsiteNameImage`. This is because you can’t call the model `Image` because this would cause the name of a reverse relation to clash.

> We will not remove the built-in image model as that would force developers to perform a migration that this RFC hopes to put an end to. But we could rename it to something obsolete sounding to discourage it’s use (`LegacyImage`?). This should only require developers to update foreign keys and create a simple schema migration to update for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will not remove the built-in image model as that would force developers to perform a migration that this RFC hopes to put an end to. But we could rename it to something obsolete sounding to discourage its use (`LegacyImage`?). This should only require developers to update foreign keys and create a simple schema migration to update for.
```

### Tweak the beginners tutorial so it uses the custom image model

We will only make necessary tweaks so that it works with the new project template. I don’t think there’s any need to describe the image model in the beginners tutorial.

### Remove the “Custom image model” advanced topics doc

> We could replace this with a reference document that describes the methods that developers can override to tweak its behaviour.

Reviewer: Something similar would need to be done for the [Custom document model](http://docs.wagtail.io/en/v2.6.3/advanced_topics/documents/custom_document_model.html) documentation page.

# RFC 44: Make "custom image model" the default

* Authors: Karl Hobley
* Created: 2019-10-23
* Last Modified: 2018-10-23

## Abstract

"Custom image models" is a feature that allows developers to supply a
model for Wagtail to use to store image metadata instead of using the
built-in one. It enables developers to add custom fields to images and
override Wagtail's default image handling behaviour.

It's challenging to switch to a custom image model once a site
has already made use of Wagtail's built-in image model. Because of
this, we can't add new features that require a custom image model as it
may not be feasible for some users to migrate to one.

This RFC proposes that we start creating new Wagtail projects with a
custom image model from the start. This change will add a small amount
of extra code to the project template, which I know we would want to
avoid, but I think preventing a potentially arduous migration later
outweighs the overhead of having one extra app in the project.

This change also applies to image rendition and document models as well.

## Specification

To implement this RFC, we will make the following changes:

> ### Update the project template to use custom image, rendition, and document models

Reviewer 2: Could we also add a custom `User` model, based on the same rationale?

> We will add a new app called `assets` into the base project template.

Reviewer 3: we used `media` (and added custom wagtailmedia classes there as well)

This app will contain three models: `Image`, `Rendition` and `Document`.

All three of these models will exactly match their built-in counterparts
(we will not add an `alt` field to the image model out of the box).

### Add a custom image model to bakerydemo

We will add the `assets` app as described in the previous section and
update the fixtures and foreign keys to use this new app.

> ### Rename the built-in models to fix naming conflict and discourage their use

Reviewer 2: I’m not clear on whether the effort suggested here is justified.

Currently, custom image models are often called `CustomImage` or
`WebsiteNameImage` because calling the model `Image` would cause the
name of a reverse relation to clash.

We will not remove the built-in image model, as that would only force
developers to perform the complex migration that this RFC aims to
eliminate for future projects.

### Tweak the beginners tutorial, so it uses the custom image model

We will only make necessary tweaks so that it works with the new project
template. I don't think there's any need to describe the image model in
the beginners tutorial.

### Remove the "Custom image model" advanced topics doc

We could replace this with a reference document that describes the

> methods that developers can override to tweak its behaviour.

Reviewer 2: Here and below – I’m not sure I follow.  I’d still call it a custom image model as it’s custom to each project. And the docs would still be useful for the thousands of project that have been existing before the changes suggested here. And the projects that get created without `wagtail start`?
